---
title: 111 First ED Booking
date: 2020-11-03 12:00:00Z
change: 362
product_manager: Steve Bellerby
contact: james.beeson2@nhs.net
---

## Summary of release

Part of 111 First, Change 362 provides functionality for 111 online users to book a time slot in an Emergency Department.

## Description

Because of the coronavirus pandemic NHS urgent care services want to reduce the number of patients congregating in waiting areas. Offering more booked appointments is one way to manage this.

Booking capability will be enabled locally using the Directory of Services (DoS). Local teams can activate this feature simply by updating the DoS profile(s) of relevant service(s) with a [NHS booking](https://digital.nhs.uk/developer/api-catalogue/booking-specification-versions) endpoint (part of the Care Connect standard). See ‘Impacts’ below for more details.

This first release will enable booking options for online patients, if their symptoms assessment results in one of the ‘core’ Emergency Treatment Centre (ETC) dispositions:

- Dx02 Attend Emergency Treatment Centre within 1 hour
- Dx03 Attend Emergency Treatment Centre within 4 hours
- Dx89 Attend Emergency Treatment Centre within 12 hours
- Dx118 Attend Emergency Dental Treatment Centre within 4 hours

Additional releases in the near future will extend this feature to ‘special’ ETC dispositions:

- Dx92 Refer to Mental Health/Crisis Service within 4 hours
- Dx94 Attend Emergency Treatment Centre within 1 hour for Sexual Assault Assessment

## Impacts

Urgent care teams including commissioners, IUC providers, DoS teams and hospital trusts will need to be aware of the following:

1. There is no whitelist to restrict activation of ED booking; if an ED service’s DoS profile contains both an ED booking endpoint and the ‘digital referral’ role, online patients with the dispositions above will see the option to book into that service
2. Therefore, a separate ED profile for online use may be required, if urgent care teams wish to introduce and control ED booking for online and telephone patients separately
3. In the event that an online booking fails patients will be advised to attend unheralded or to choose another service that can assess their symptoms.
4. Online ED booking does not affect the online validation process for ED outcomes (enabled using Dx334, 337, 338 in DoS); 111 online will still present patients the option to book a call for further clinical assessment before displaying any services with booking

## Data

Local teams can visit [https://dataportal.111.nhs.uk/](https://dataportal.111.nhs.uk/) to review the number of patients that might be eligible for ED booking from 111 online.
