---
title: Pathways update v19.3.9
date: 2020-06-11 16:30:00Z
change: 323
product_manager: Steve Bellerby
contact: james.beeson2@nhs.net
---

## Summary of release

Pathways update v19.3.9 introduces coronavirus questions to 111 online CDSS.

## Description

The latest NHS Pathways release (19.3.9) expands the number of 111 online users checked for signs of coronavirus. This is an upgrade to the clinical decision support system which now routinely asks patients if they have symptoms of coronavirus when they visit 111.nhs.uk. Users who select the online COVID-19 assessment directly are asked to choose their main symptoms via a guided selected page and undergo a Pathways triage. All patients with coronavirus symptoms who need further attention are instructed to book a call from the COVID clinical response service.

## Impacts

### Providers

Patients who report coronavirus symptoms and need further assessment will still be directed to book a call with the COVID clinical response service.

## Data

Pathways Update v19.3.9 on 11th June 2020 implemented substantial changes to the 111 online user journey. As a result, the new daily report has a number of key differences that make a direct comparison with the previous report difficult.

- We were previously able to track users via the coronavirus service homepage, now that coronavirus questions have moved inside the 111 online clinical decision support system this is no longer possible. The previous stand-alone service was the only way for users to reach a coronavirus disposition, following the update there are now two possible paths to a coronavirus disposition:
  - Users who access the service via the coronavirus banner or directly through a search engine will reach the Guided Selection Page which asks about identified coronavirus symptoms leading to a coronavirus disposition.
  - Users who access 111 online through the main site may be triaged on a coronavirus pathway if the symptoms they search for match identified coronavirus symptoms and may reach a coronavirus disposition without using the Guided Selection Page.
- The Guided Selection Page appears after the demographics questions – which saw a high number of users drop off the service – this may explain why the number of Guided Selection Page users is much lower than the previous number of coronavirus homepage users.
- The number of users reaching a coronavirus disposition is likely to exceed the number of Guided Selection Page users as there are now two routes users may take to reach a disposition.
- A key benefit of the update is that users no longer need to suspect their symptoms may be coronavirus in order to be triaged for coronavirus if their presenting symptoms match the list.

## Covid Response Service

The CRS stopped using the 111 online coronavirus service from 8am 10/06/2020.
